# Stress-Test-Models-Thoughts

## Summary of My Thoughts 
In my 6 years of experience validating econometric stress testing models, here are some of my key takeaways: 

1.	Statistical models of balance sheet variables (e.g. loan growth rates, deposit growth, loan losses) reasonably reflect stressful conditions of a typical recession (high unemployment; declining and negative GDP growth) in terms of capturing the peaks but based on the models I have validated, often do not capture the persistence of a downturn. This is especially relevant in an environment where the duration of the downturn is highly uncertain, much like the coronavirus-induced recessionary conditions. 
2.	Institutions that utilize peer analysis leverage useful contextual information that improves upon the quantitative estimates. Companies like USAA use credit card loss data and PacWest use core deposit and loan growth data to build a proxy for what the risk-profile of their institution *will be* which is proactive and forward-looking *by design*; this is generally a strong feature of stress testing models that should be highly encouraged.  
3.	Models that reach statistical modalities of success are useful as a first-approximation. However, without broader meta-knowledge (i.e. historical/institutional context and/or theoretical underpinnings where testable predictions can be generated), the models are almost certainly doomed to fail because no two recessions are alike. Use of industry data in model development efforts can often provide this additional support but more generally, there needs to be stronger evidence provided by academic or industry relevant research.
4.	The utilization of both longer time-series and cross-sectional information, where available (through a combination of peer analysis and longer history industry data), holds the most promise in terms of identifying causal macroeconomic forces driving bank balance sheet variables through recessions. To date and to my knowledge, these models are not yet the industry standard.
5. Stress tests and the models used to generate them *can be incredibly insightful* for risk management, depending on the key product lines of each financial institution. For instance, banks with a large portfolio of commercial real estate holdings can use stress test models to gauge the size of their loan losses in a severe recession and use that insight to manage the risk. This is particularly relevant in America today due to a secular shift in demand from commercial to residential real estate brought forth by the normalization of remote work arrangements and an increasingly digitized economy. 

**In summary, these points are pertinent in 2021 where stagflationary forces are present. There is a broad configuration of global supply chains, unprecendented monetary and fiscal stimulus, permanent alteration of the labor market where large portion of adult workforce permanently unemployed and/or no longer participating, among other secular shifts in society..** 

 
